Testing, testing.
Today's date is January 31st, 1986.
This is an interview with Norman Borlaug at Texas A&M University.
This is a test.
This is January 31st, 1986.
It's Terry Anderson and this is tape number 11, which means we're about 16 hours of conversation with Norman Borlaug.
And we're going to start off by talking about another aspect of criticism.
criticism of the Green Revolution and Dr. Borlaug, and that deals with inequality, so let's start with that.
There are those individuals who think that the so-called Green Revolution contributed to making greater inequalities, greater discrepancies between the poor and the rich, so-called.
especially on the food availability front.
I'm not so sure that these inequalities haven't been built into the system since long before recorded time.
As I visualize it, and there's nothing to prove this, but knowing human nature, the strongest tribes
during the hunting's epoch, occupied the best grazing lands where the largest animals were prevalent in the largest numbers.
And the weaker tribes were pushed off into fringe areas, very often more limited in rainfall, consequently more restricted in vegetative growth, and this in turn led to
these sites being occupied mostly by smaller animals.
The result was that those who occupied these less favorable ecosystems had to rely on smaller animals
for their food supply.
Of course, all of them were supplementing it at a certain point in time with the collection of wild grains and nuts and fruits and roots.
But be that so, it was probably true for both those occupying the favored ecosystems, more privileged in rainfall, consequently in
grass and forage, therefore a higher carrying capacity for the larger animals, a more privileged hunting site.
And the less privileged were pushed into more marginal areas.
Having to rely on smaller animals,
Meaning that the struggle to get enough of them to feed their peoples was probably disproportionate to those who occupied their sites.
There's nothing to prove this.
It goes back before written history.
human beings, and not only human beings, other species of animals, this is almost certainly to have been the case.
So that I think it's quite unjust to say that we have, those of us who have been involved in
evolving this so-called green revolution have been responsible for provoking this worsening situation.
My own feeling has existed for a long time, but to think that a technological change which has greatly increased the world food production in the last 15, 20, 25 years,
could also alone have corrected all of the social injustices that preceded probably by quite a bit Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden.
This isn't to be.
But we need to remember that there are two aspects of this problem.
One is to produce enough food.
The second is to distribute it equitably.
Now the transfer
of the benefits can be achieved in various ways in an organized society through tax transfers, food stamps, food for work, a whole series of possibilities depending on social programs, depending on the stage of evolution of society.
And that's a must.
But that's on a different front.
And then the biological agricultural front.
That doesn't mean that I haven't been aware of the need for this.
And I've pushed for it time and again for trying to prevent as far as possible these with little purchasing power being left behind.
And that's a constant struggle.
Okay.
Now I have a couple things to say about that.
This seems in a sense, as an American historian I can say this, it seems in a sense that what you're talking about, the fact that there is always inequality in your basis, seems like social Darwinism.
Well, how would you respond to that?
The idea of there are fitter groups of people and those fitter groups would naturally rise to the top and get the best areas and then become the most productive type people.
Well, first, as a geneticist, let me say that I think that this genetic variation transcends groups.
I think within any group
The slogan that we're all born equal biologically makes no sense at all.
We're all born different.
And that is in itself one of the great buffering actions that has permitted mankind to evolve both biologically, sociologically and politically.
There's another social aspect of this.
Under our Constitution, we are all equal under the law.
Equal rights, equal opportunities.
But that doesn't mean we're all born the same, which is implied.
That we're all born the same genetically.
Some by a straight stroke of luck.
How the egg and sperm came together.
Might have been the individual, myself included, might have been any one of a million other brothers or sisters.
I just happen to be what I am.
I've got ten fingers and ten toes and have had good health.
I've taken care of myself and I've tried to develop, I think, very
average intellect and mental capacity within the limits that I drew these cards.
That's a question.
Whenever I talk about potential, whether it's in plants or whether it's in animals or whether it's in human beings, I look at it this way.
The limits of potential are set in that second.
fertilization takes place for the individual and we have no control over it but what is done subsequently will determine whether that potential can be expressed or not whether it's latent and will never be expressed because of what happens from a sociological political standpoint let's take the case of
The wheat plant that I've spent most of my time working with.
Those high yielding semi dwarf varieties have a potential.
Let's say the spring wheat types which are about 150, 160 day maturity classes.
When they are grown properly, under favorable environment, they can produce
7 to even 8 tons per hectare, which is roughly 115 to 120 bushels per acre in those 160 days time.
Rarely do you get this happening.
And the reason is that to achieve it, first of all, there are some factors that are beyond the control of human beings through temperatures, whether they go up too soon or don't go up soon enough.
or don't go down soon enough after planting to stimulate the vegetative growth.
And if they go up too soon in the spring when grain is approaching maturity, the grain will likely be shriveled and won't be plump.
So you've got to manipulate all of these factors to permit the expression of that.
You have to restore soil fertility that's been depleted by bad farming practices over decades and sometimes hundreds of years.
You have to use the right dates and rates of planting to get the best expression of that plant's ability to respond to both the improved soil fertility, to utilize the moisture properly,
Then as soon as you manipulate those two, you've got to control the weeds because they become aggressive.
And unless you're careful, they will consume much of the moisture and the fertilizer and will compete with the wheat plant and thereby reduce the yield potential.
Then also there is the limitations imposed by various kinds of diseases in insect pests.
All of these have to be manipulated before that plant can express its true genetic yield potential.
Now to get this technology into commercial production, you have to control also the social economic factors.
In other words, the availability of these inputs at reasonable prices, credit for the farmer to buy it, and a fair price at time of harvest that's not manipulated by the grain merchant.
Now let's take a look at, that's the wheat plant.
About three years ago, the top production of milk was held by, I told them to cut that off, excuse me.
This cow, I think she was in Indiana, she produced something on the order of 6,000 gallons of milk and a full period of lactation.
That's fantastic.
She could never, that was the potential she expressed.
But had she been badly fed, she probably would have produced one-third or one-half as much.
And had she not had proper veterinary care, she might have died from disease.
So again you have this potential and it being expressed or not expressed.
All of these go together, looking at the child.
That child inherits this set of genes from father and mother.
But before that true potential of that youngster can be expressed, first it must have good nutrition, develop a strong body and good health to be able to work effectively.
develop its other talents.
And then the mental intellectual will never develop without proper education.
And that's the sad part of so many youth in the developing world never having had a chance to express their genetic yield potential, either health-wise, physical-wise, or intellectually.
And I've had the satisfaction, I don't know whether we mentioned this in one of the previous interviews,
of picking up a number of young Mexicans who had dropped out of school in the second and third grade.
We got them working with us chasing birds.
When was this?
You didn't mention this, no?
No?
Well, and I think this is worth mentioning.
We talked about Little League and we didn't talk about this, no.
Well, then let me just take one or two cases to illustrate these unpolished gems, jewels, that never had a chance to express their potential.
One of those people is today Dr. Arturo Hernandez, who received his PhD in genetics and plant breeding from the University of Minnesota about three years ago.
Way back in the middle 50s, early 50s, he was a little ragged boy near one of our research stations in La Piedad, Michoacan, Mexico, looking for a job.
We put him on scaring birds during the time the grain was rotting, running around cracking a whip, throwing mud clots at the birds to keep them out of the experimental plots.
He had bright shiny eyes and he could tell he was very intelligent and he started to do many other things beyond scaring birds.
During the harvest he would catch on fast.
Our whole team liked him, he worked hard.
We encouraged him, got him back into school.
He finished school at that primary school, at this little village.
And then there was an opportunity to, we were opening another station near Celaya, where there was a secondary school at night.
And so we transferred in there.
And he continued to work with us, went to night school, finished secondary school.
By then he was changing into pretty bright-eyed, bushy-tailed, likable little personality.
I should say that several of us, and it wasn't just me, I would put up a few pesos, but I insisted that my Mexican colleagues would also contribute to
Seeing him through, helping him beyond what he earned, which was pretty meager, through night school.
Eventually he got his high school degree and then he applied to Topingo, but his grades were not good enough because it was an early bad start to get a scholarship.
Topingo is the National College of Agriculture near our headquarters, where El Baton, our summit headquarters is today.
But we made provisions that he worked on Saturdays and Sundays and during vacations with Dr. Eva Yegas in the biochemistry laboratory.
She had taken an interest in him also out in the field.
had been one who had contributed a few pesos all along the way.
And while he was there, it was even more difficult for him to earn enough, and so we continued to put a few pesos together.
And he graduated and got a B.S.
degree, or Ingeniero Agrónomo, we call him in Mexico.
And then he worked with one of our
an ex-weight team man who was the director of extension for several years.
He went back to graduate school, got a master's in Chapingo.
He did very well.
Then we got him a fellowship and he went to the University of Minnesota.
He came back with a PhD about three years ago.
He was a highly intelligent, well-motivated young scientist.
We've got a couple of others that we picked up the same way, that have now received
Bachelor of Science degrees, Master of Science degrees, some of them, and one of them particularly is out teaching now in an undergraduate sort of practical school of agriculture.
He came from the land too, up the hard way.
We picked up quite a few others that are the best technicians that we have on the whole wheat team today, but we identified them
And also this was in the earliest days of the old Rockefeller program.
We didn't quite know how to go about this then, like we did in the case of these that I've just mentioned.
But we did get them back into school in the Finnish primary and sometimes secondary school.
And one of those, Ray's Vega, has been with the wheat program.
since 1947.
He's been with me one way or another this whole time.
And he runs the whole operation.
At one time he was the master technician.
But he's moved beyond that.
He runs the whole experimental station from the standpoint of preparing all the land, fertilizing it, supervising all the plantings, handling all the irrigation, handling all of the whole operation, which is the largest and most complex in the world from the standpoint of backing up the scientific work.
One other who came up through the same route, who's a master at electrician and handling all sorts of gadgets.
He's in Dr. Eva Viegas' laboratory.
He came up through the field the same way.
And he can handle those amino acid analyzers and not only handle their operation, but when they go, when they break down, he's perfectly capable of repairing them.
So you see that there are many unpolished jewels left behind.
And I mentioned this simply to illustrate.
I could go on.
Many of them that we've salvaged, got going on their own way that are vital to the whole research organization, but probably would never have shown this potential had they not been given a hand up at the right time.
And so, when lots of these accusations are
being made that these injustices are worsened.
I say... By the Green Revolution.
By the Green Revolution, this is all nonsense.
These injustices are all around about us and I dare say those who are making these accusations are probably sitting in a very privileged position and never knelt down personally to try to identify some of this
rough talent that's unpolished gyms.
We have them in our low-income societies here in the USA as well.
It's not just in the developing nations.
like to be critical, I say sometimes they should look in their own mirror and they would see maybe that they too are guilty of some of the same things that they accuse others of being guilty of.
We all need to reflect on this and try to, insofar as possible, overcome many of these injustices.
It's not simple.
And then we have to remember
I've been talking about those that had tremendous genetic yield potential.
Also, there's some that got poor cards to begin with.
And you've got a different problem there.
From my standpoint, society
has to make some provision to take care of those.
That's an entirely different path.
And then there's a third category where they have the talent but never have the motivation and that probably very often comes from, again, from their lack of proper home assistance early in life and probably
Many of these instabilities have to do with the whole hormone system that is, again, probably largely inherited.
Okay, well, you feel then that there's always been inequality, and we just discussed it in full.
Let's move now to right after you won the Nobel Prize and the type of work that you were doing throughout the early 1970s.
We've been through India, Pakistan, and Egypt.
Well, even in 1970, there were many who said that this was just a flash in the pan.
it hadn't proven itself.
The Green Revolution.
Yeah, that the yields would, this was due in a large part to better weather, a whole series of things that didn't have anything to do with science and technology.
But, so we continued to work in
India and Pakistan, Turkey, many other countries.
We began to work in many other countries also.
Funded by Rockefeller.
By then, it was the International Center for Mace and Weed Improvement.
CIMIT had come into being.
Okay, right.
CIMIT came into being.
I should point out that... We've talked about the development.
There was a no man's land as far as the Rockefeller Program and CIMIT were concerned.
In that the Rockefeller Mexican program terminated in 1960.
And then I was assigned, there were several of us who were still left in Mexico as consultants to ENIA, the new national institute, which we had helped form, trained most of the people.
And we were funded out of what was called the Inter-American Food Crop Program.
It was kind of a misnomer, because it was more than American.
The first year or two, we were looking around as to what might be done in some of the other Latin American countries, but that was, I believe I mentioned, when I made one trip through the joint sponsorship of Rockefeller Foundation.
to look at these problems, Morocco to India.
And as a result, we started this training program for young scientists from those countries, which really set the stage for transferring these seeds and the interest to the third world countries, these young students.
And you brought it to Mexico, yeah.
We talked about that.
And the development of Senate.
By 64, then on paper,
an agreement was signed to establish the International Mason Center.
But it was 66 before we started to look for staff.
And it was 68 before we really started to make any progress to pick up the right kind of staff.
And so by 70, or shortly after,
We had expanded our staff and I suppose by that time we had some people either posted in Pakistan, India, Turkey, Lebanon,
And in addition, moving out from those places to work in many other countries like Egypt, Jordan, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, Syria, Argentina, Chile.
and so on.
Much of this time, I used to spend a month here, a month there in many of these countries with our staff.
Anderson, who had been in India during
This period from about 63 to 71 came back to Mexico as my deputy, the late Dr. Glenn Anderson, who was Canadian.
Unusually talented scientist, but also a very good leader.
He knew how to move things.
He had charisma, but he also had courage.
He knew how to work not only with scientists and farmers, but with politicians.
who had been in Pakistan later with the Ford Fund, and later operated out of Beirut in a number of the Near East countries.
He came back to head up all agricultural extension under President of Mexico.
And by then, we had
By 1972, we had a pretty good young staff assembled, many of which are still in the cement program today.
So we continued to work in these countries.
The main emphasis then was twofold, broadening the disease resistance, which had been surprisingly good.
But since wheat is a crop that has at least 30
different diseases that become epidemic under some climatic conditions.
It's a never-ending fight to stay ahead of these.
You can't work on all of them at once.
You have to establish an order of priorities which are the most dangerous in different ecosystems of the world and correct them one by one insofar as possible.
Then there are biological changes going on in the pathogens.
Things that were resistant become susceptible.
It's a never-ending job.
Probably one of the most important things that came into play in the 70s was the strengthening, expansion and strengthening of this whole international network of
wheat nurseries that were sent around the world.
Is this the second of the two-fold scope?
Okay, so one would be increasing disease resistance and the second would be the development of wheat nurseries?
Which permitted the implementation of this broadening of disease resistance.
Because then it permitted several things.
One,
And these are wheat nurseries internationally.
We're talking about all of the countries.
How many do you think there are?
20, 50?
These nurseries, there are several different kinds of nurseries.
One which attempts to measure yield of all of the varieties that are included in the test.
Generally there are 50 varieties.
These are the most important commercial varieties of all of the spring wheat grown regions of the world.
That constitutes probably 15 in number.
And the remaining 35 are new experimental weeds that are incorporated into this nursery.
for evaluation.
They can be submitted by any plant breeder any place in the world.
They simply send 200 grams of seed to simmet and multiply
brush the seed, clean it, disinfect it, and make it up into envelopes of replicated plots.
And these are sent to about 125 different places in the world where they are planted under the conditions of that country.
Some of them under irrigation, some under rain-fed conditions, some where it's under pretty severe drought, stress, other places where there's ample rainfall, different diseases in every place.
And all of these notes are taken, as well as the yield and agronomic data, and they come back to the CIMIT headquarters and they go through a computer and they're summarized.
The data go back to guide anyone who uses it intelligently.
Now, we use this like a Bible or a Koran to plan the next generation of crosses.
We see how these varieties react in different parts of the world, to different diseases, to different climatic conditions.
Whether they're high-yielding or low-yielding, whether they're stable or whether they vary with different environments.
Just think of the information on... Tremendous.
Incredible.
And this had never been done like this before.
It set a pattern which is now being carried out
by the other institutes like the Rice Institute and by the other half of the house in Simmons, by the maize program.
The maize program had never operated this way.
The idea being that maize was different.
It was supposed to be more location specific.
I long since discarded this philosophy.
The difference was when we used this shuttle breeding technique, we were identifying those unusual individuals.
of plants that could grow well under these wide range of latitudes, elevations, temperatures, diseases, which permitted after an adequate test, whole shiploads of seed to be moved halfway around the world.
These techniques are pretty well established on most of the major crops that the international institutes are working with.
The International Rice Research Institute began to use it first, but it's used now by the IGRS Act, the International Center for Crops in the semi-aerotropics, working on sorghum and peanuts.
mill it by the other institutes that are working on different crops.
Now, also we began to find some varieties that were higher yielding or that had better acceptation from the standpoint of grain types that were preferred in certain areas.
But I think the most important thing of all of these international nurseries was the, that it wove
fabric of world fraternity of wheat scientists.
They had this in common and it bound them all together.
Then we began to organize these regional nurseries or regional workshops where we try to bring as many of those young scientists who had
been trained in Mexico at one point in time, or others who had never been to Mexico.
Bring them together, sometimes Cyprus, sometimes Pakistan, sometimes India, or wherever.
And so this has continued up to this day.
We get in problems, bureaucracies frequently.
are pretty inflexible in letting many of the young scientists travel.
The funds are inadequate.
We have tried to find some supplementary funds, but on the other hand, we feel that the government of those countries have to contribute.
Otherwise, it's a free ride and they never really pay attention.
to what those scientists say and the importance of their work.
Government has to support it.
We try to prod and push and convince them of this, but it's a never-ending struggle.
It's not glamorous like building a new dam.
Yeah.
It's not something you can see.
That's right.
Our new monument.
And so approximately, we've talked about the students before, approximately how many students do you get, or what was the growth pattern from the late 60s when you started?
When I started this in 61, I was alone.
I was the training officer.
And I told them that I could never handle alone more than 67.
a year, which I did for several years, until Simon was born.
Then we started establishing a hands-on training program, not just in genetics and plant breeding and plant pathology, but also in agronomy and soils and even in serial technology.
All of those aspects that are important.
Today, each year, we have about 60
They come from many different countries of the world.
In Wheaton, I'm pretty clearly alone.
In Mace, they have about an equal number.
Those numbers are limited by our physical facilities, especially the cafeteria and housing.
We're getting more library and laboratories
I should say classroom, laboratory space, a new building is now in the process of being built with Japanese funds and that will become, will be inaugurated in September on the 20th anniversary of Singapore.
And then in addition we have a lot of more short courses where people come through.
And how long is your basic wheat course for scientists?
Six months.
Originally it was for a year.
We wanted to give them two generations.
They shuttled down on the coast in winter in northwest Mexico and in the highlands in the summer.
So they would get the feel of handling this massive amount of material, how you had to be organized to handle these millions of rows or plants.
And to do it on schedule.
If you fall behind and plant late, then you get frosted in the next cycle.
You lose the whole thing.
And so it had great advantages in having them through two cycles which was one year.
But then the demands for this type of training was so great that we had to cut it in half to provide opportunities for more people.
That's the way it remains.
In addition, we have, for example, one of the things that's always a limiting factor in the developing countries is the poor management of their agricultural experiment stations.
The experimental error is tremendously great because of poor leveling of land and poor control of weeds and if it's irrigation, poor irrigation practices.
And that means that if you're trying to measure the differences in yielding ability of a number of lines of wheat compared to the old best variety,
You don't know how much of that difference is due to variation in the soil or in the plots and not to the biological genetic difference.
The same way they're poorly managed from the standpoint of the equipment.
So they just don't have the equipment to... And if they get the equipment, it lasts about one-fourth as long as it should because of poor...
maintenance and so we have a top-notch experiment station director John Stewart who now has begun I guess about five years back he runs a couple short courses a year brings in about five or six young superintendents of experiment stations and they are right there on our stations when the land is being prepared when it's being fertilized
When the scientists come to plant, so they have to learn how to, some of those are kind of prima donnas, as you know, some scientists.
How these people have to walk on water, at least in the early stages, until they get to a point where they're mature enough so that they can tell such a scientist, my gosh, he's wrong.
All of this comes out in the wash.
And also the maintenance of the equipment.
the mechanics, how you handle the mechanics, how they're apart to keep that machinery operating, not for its expected lifetime, but even beyond, because we have such limitations in budgets in these countries.
Now, you mentioned that Japan is helping you build a building now.
What other countries have, we're talking about governments now, not foundations, but what other governments have helped you?
Well, of course, the total network of International Agricultural Research Institutes, of which there are 13 now, are financed, there must be about 39 countries, mostly from the Western world, with the exception of Japan.
The budgets a year ago for the total operation of this network was $184 million.
Now that sounds like a lot of money, and it is, but if you take a look at it this way, let's say, I'll say $184 million.
For the entire 13 nation.
I'm sure that's not divided equally.
No.
Well, let me put it this way.
I should have calculated this.
If it were a hundred dollars a ton,
A million tons of wheat will pay for all of this.
Of course, wheat's worth more than $100, so it'll be $150.
800,000 tons of wheat, and yet in one country alone, to show you what has happened, the wheat production in India at the beginning of the introduction of the new technology was 11 million tons.
Last year, the harvest in India was 46 million tons.
That increase of 34 million tons
You see, if you multiply this, that was $150 a ton, or even 100, whatever you figure you want to use.
It's a fantastically big return.
All of this was a spin-off.
from the original investment in the Rockfella program on Mexico, starting back in 1943.
Over that period of 1943 to 2016, when that program was completed, the total expenditures by the Rockfella Foundation for program operation for the experiment station
facilities that were developed, a whole series, and the fellowships for training the staff, as I recall, was about $6 million.
The entire thing was only $6 million for 20 years?
$6.1 million for 17 years.
Gee whiz, that's awful.
If you converted that to $1985, that would be the equivalent of $23 million.
And yet, you see, in one
country.
So there was tremendous payoff.
Now this isn't to say that the current budgets aren't contributing to that, but the pattern was set by this original program.